Bare feet are exposed to microscopic
organisms that live in warm,
moist environments, like showers.
The organisms that usually cause
toenail fungal infections
are called dermatophytes.
Fungal spores enter through tiny cuts
or work through small separations
between the nail and nail bed.
They then bloom into tiny
fungal filaments or hypha
that destroy the nail from below.
Fungal infections are more common
in toenails than fingernails,
possibly because the dark, moist environment
inside shoes helps fungus to grow.
At first the infection may only
cause a spot on the toenail.
But over time it can cause
ugly scaling and cracking,
and painful splitting of the nail.
Fungal infection of the toenails,
called onychomycosis,
can be treated with oral medications,
topical medications you apply to the infected nail,
antifungal nail lacquer,
and in extreme cases,
surgical removal of the nail.